<h2>I</h2>

How splendid it is to begin a new career,
and to appear suddenly before the
learned world with a book of discoveries in one's hand, like an unexpected
comet flashing through space.

No—I will no longer keep my book in
obscurity — here it is! I have undertaken and
completed a journey of forty-two days round
my room. The interesting observations I
made, and the constant pleasure I felt all
along the road, make me desirous of publishing my travels — the conviction that they will be
useful has decided me to do so. My soul feels
an inexpressible satisfaction when I think
of the infinite number of unfortunates to whom
I bring a certain cure for ennui and a solace
for all the ills they bear. The pleasure I
find in travelling round my room shelters me
from the restless jealousy of man and is
independent of fortune. Surely, no one is so
unhappy and forlorn as not to have some
haven of refuge whither he can retire and shut
out the world? This is all you require for
the journey.

I am sure that every sensible man will adopt
my plan whatever his character or temperament; whether miserly or prodigal, rich or
poor, young or old, born under a tropical
sky or near the pole, he travel as
I do; in the immense family of mankind,
which swarms the surface of the earth
there is not one—no not one—(I mean of
those who live in rooms) who after reading this
book, can withhold his approval of the new
method of travelling I introduce to the world.



<h2>II</h2>

I might begin the <i xml:lang="fr">eloge</i> of my journey
by saying that it costs me nothing.
This point deserves attention! This
alone would commend it to people of
moderate means. But there is another class
of persons from whom it is sure of a good reception, and for this very same reason,—that
it costs nothing.

"And who are they," you ask? "Why,
the rich, of course."

Besides, what a resource this mode of
travelling will be for invalids; they will not
dread the severity of the weather or the seasons.
Cowards will find security from robbers and
will have no fear of precipices or quagmires.

Thousands who hitherto have not ventured,
or who were unable and never dreamed of
travelling, will now resolve to follow my
example. Will the laziest man hesitate to
set out with me in order to taste a pleasure
which will cost him neither exertion nor
money?

Come, then, let us make a start!

Follow me all ye whom disappointed affection or the neglect of friends confines to your
rooms, far away from the meanness and
perfidy of man. Follow me, all who
are unfortunate! or invalids or weary of the
world! Come all ye sluggards, rise en masse!
and ye who are brooding over sinister pro
jects of reform or seclusion, on account of
a disappointment, ye who renounce the world
for life in some retired cell, amiable recluses
of one evening only, come! leave those
gloomy thoughts, you are losing a moment's
pleasure without gaining a moment's wisdom,
deign but to accompany me on my journey;
we will make very short stages and laugh
at travellers who go to Paris and Rome. No
obstacle shall stop us, but gaily giving the
rein to our imagination we will follow it
whithersoever it chooses to lead us.

<h2>III</h2>

There are so many inquisitive people in the
world! I am quite sure that someone
will be anxious to know why my journey
round my room has lasted forty-two days
instead of forty-three or any other length of
time, but how can I enlighten the reader,
when I do not know myself? All I can say is,
that if the work is too long for his taste it is
not my fault that it is not shorter; apart from
my vanity as a traveller, I should have been
well content with one chapter. I was
comfortable and contented as possible in my
room, but alas! I was not at liberty to go out
when I chose. I really believe that but for the
intervention of certain influential people who
bestirred themselves on my behalf, and whose
kindness I have not forgotten, I should have
had plenty of time to produce a folio volume,
so kindly disposed towards me were the guardians who caused me to make this journey
round my room.

But observe, intelligent reader, how wrong
these people were, and follow if you can the
arguments I am about to put before you.

Can anything be more natural and just
than to cut the throat of someone who by
chance treads on your toe, or who lets fall
some bitter expression in a moment of anger,
of which your imprudence was the cause, or
who has had the misfortune to find favour in
the sight of your lady-love?
We go into meadow, and there, like
Nicole and the Bourgeois Gentilhomme, set
to work with thrust and parry; and in order
to make our revenge sure and complete we
expose our bare breast and risk the chance of
being killed ourselves. Certainly nothing can be
more reasonable than this, and yet we actually
sometimes find people who disapprove of this
laudable custom. But what is as reasonable
as the rest is, that even these same people
who disapprove, and who would have it re
garded as grave offence, most roundly
abuse the man who declines the meeting.
More than one unfortunate fellow, by follow
ing their advice, has lost his reputation and
employment, so that when one has the misfortune to have on hand what is called "an
affair of honour," it is not a bad plan to draw
lots, whether to conduct it according to law
or custom, and as these are in conflict, judges
may decide on their sentence by tossing up.

And very likely some such decision explains how and why my tour lasted exactly
forty-two days.

<h2>IV</h2>

My chamber is situated under the fifty
fifth degree of latitude according to
the measurement of Father Beccaria.
It lies East and West, and forms an oblong
thirty-six paces all round, if you keep very
close to the wall.

My tour of it will, however, be much
longer, for I shall often cross my room up
and down, or even diagonally, without following rule or method.

I shall even make zigzags and run
every possible figure in geometry if necessary. I do not like those people who are such
masters of their steps and ideas, who say,
"To-day I will pay three calls, I will write
four letters, I will finish that book." My soul
takes in all kinds of ideas, tastes, and sentiments, and easily, and greedily receives what
ever comes first.

And why <em>should</em> it deny itself those pleasures
which are scattered along the hard
road of life? They are so rare, so few and
far between, that it would be folly not to stop,
or even stray from one's road to cull those
which are within our reach. There is nothing
more attractive, according to my taste, than
to follow up the track of one's thoughts, as a
hunter pursues his game, without going by any
set road.

Hence, in my tour round my room, I seldom
go by any fixed route; I start from my table
towards a picture which hangs in a corner,
from thence I start off obliquely for the door,
but although it might have been my serious
intention to get there, if I happen to come
across my arm-chair by the way, I make no
bother about it, but forthwith settle myself
therein. An arm-chair is indeed an excellent
piece of furniture, and absolutely indispensable to a contemplative man. In the long
evenings of winter, "far from the madding
crowd," it is often pleasant and always wise
to make oneself comfortable in it. A good
fire, some books and pens,—what excellent
resources against ennui! And still more pleasant it is, to forget books and pens in order
to poke the fire and give oneself up to some
sweet day-dream or to hammer out
verses with which to amuse one's friends.
Then the hours slip away and fall silently
into eternity without your perceiving their
sad flight.

<h2>V</h2>

Next to my arm-chair, going North you
will find my bed, which is placed at the
end of my room, and forms the most
agreeable perspective. It is placed in the
most fortunate situation, where the earliest
rays of the sun come to play amongst my
curtains. I see them in the fine summer
mornings creeping along the white wall, as
the sun rises; the elm trees outside my window split them up in innumerable ways and
causing them to play on the pink and white
hangings of my bed, throw a charming tint
around.

I listen to the confused twittering of the
swallows which have taken possession of the
house tops, and of the other birds which
frequent the elm trees; then a thousand joyous fancies fill my soul, and no one in the
wide world can enjoy a more agreeable or
peaceful awakening.

I confess I love to enjoy these sweet
moments and to prolong as much as possible
the pleasure of meditating in the delightful
warmth of my bed. Can anyscene more strong
ly affect the imagination, or create tenderer
thoughts than this piece of furniture does,
in which I sometimes forget the actual and
float away into the ideal? Modest reader,
be not alarmed, may I not allude to the
ecstacy of a lover when he first enfolds a virtuous wife in his arms?—ineffable pleasure,
which my wretched lot forbids me ever to
taste! Here the mother, intoxicated with
joy at the birth of her son, forgets her pangs?
Here we experience the most extravagant
pleasures, the fruits of imagination and hope.
In a word, in this delightful place, during one
half of our life, we can forget the annoyances
of the other half. What a crowd of sad
and agreeable thoughts throng at once into
my brain! Strange mixture of terrible and
delicious situations.

A bed sees us born and die: it is the ever
changing stage on which the human
plays, by turns, interesting dramas, laughable
farces, and terrible tragedies. It is a cradle
decked with flowers— a throne of love— and a
tomb.

<h2>VI</h2>

This chapter is intended for metaphysicians only. It will cast a great and powerful light on the nature of man; with this
prism I can analyse and separate the human
faculties, distinguishing the animal force from
the pure rays of intellect. It would be im
possible for me to explain how and why I
burnt my fingers, when I first began my
journey, without explaining to the reader in
the greatest detail my system of <b>Soul</b> <em>and</em> <b>Animal</b>.
Besides, this metaphysical discovery
so affects my thoughts and actions that,
unless I give the key to it at the outset, it
will be very difficult to understand this
book.

By sundry observations, I have discovered
that man is composed of a <b>soul</b> and an <b>animal</b>
—these two beings are absolutely distinct,
but are wrapped up in each other or one upon
the other; however, the soul must have a decided
superiority over the animal to enable us to make
the distinction between them. I once heard
from an old professor (and this as far back as
I can remember) that Plato called matter
"<em>the other one</em>." Very good, but I should
prefer to give this name par excellence to the
animal which is joined to our soul. In reality
this substance, which plagues us in so strange
a manner, is "<em>the other one</em>." We see, in a general
sort of way, that man is a double being; but
this, they say, is because he is composed of a
soul and a body, and they accuse the body of
I don't know how many things, but surely
very wrongly, since it is incapable of feeling
and thinking. It is the animal part we
must blame, a being, perfectly distinct from
the soul, a veritable individual, which has
its separate existence, its tastes, inclinations,
and will, and is only above other animals
because it is better educated and provided
with more perfect organs than they.

Ladies and Gentlemen! boast of your intelligence as much as you please but distrust
"<em>the other one</em>" very much, especially when
you are together. I have made, I don't know
how many experiments, on the union of these
two dissimilar creatures. For example, I
have clearly ascertained that the soul can
reduce the animal to subjection, and that, in
retaliation, the latter very often compels the
soul to act contrary to its inclination. In
governments, there is a legislative power and
an executive, but these two powers are often
in conflict. The great art of a clever man
is to know how to educate his animal so
that it can go alone, while the soul, freed from
this troublesome companion, can raise itself
to the skies.

But I must make this clear by an example.

When you are reading a book, Sir, and,
some very pleasant thought suddenly strikes
your imagination, your soul immediately
attaches itself to it and forgets the book,
while your eyes follow mechanically the
words and lines, you finish the page without
understanding it and without remembering
what you have read. This happens because
your soul, having ordered its companion to
read, gave it no warning that it was about to
be absent for a little while, so that "<em>the other
one</em>" continued reading while your soul was
no longer listening.

<h2>VII</h2>
Is not this clear to you? Let us take
another illustration.

One day last Summer I started on my
way to go to Court. I had been painting all
the morning, and my soul, amusing itself by
thinking about the art of painting, left to my
animal the duty of taking me to the King's
palace.

What a sublime art, thought my soul, is
that of painting. Happy is the man who,
touched by the aspect of nature and not
obliged to paint pictures for a living, (and yet
who does not paint solely as a pastime,) but who,
struck by the majesty of a lovely face and by the
light which plays in a thousand exquisite tints
over the human countenance, endeavours to
realize in his works the sublime effects of
nature.

Happy, too, is the painter whom love of
landscape leads into solitary walks and who can
express on his canvas the sentiment of sad
ness which is inspired by a sombre wood or a
deserted plain.

His works imitate and reproduce nature,
he creates new seas and dark caverns where
the sun never penetrates; at his command
green thickets arise and the azure of the sky
is reproduced in his pictures. He can paint
a rising storm, and we seem to hear the roll
of the thunder.

At other times he shews to the enchanted
spectator, the delightful plains of ancient
Sicily; we see the frightened nymphs, flying
through the reeds from the pursuing satyr.
Temples of majestic architecture raise their
sublime façades above the sacred forests which
surround them, imagination loses itself in the
quiet paths of this ideal land, the blue distances are blended with the sky, and the whole
landscape, reflected in a placid river forms a
scene no tongue can describe.
soul was making these reflections "<em>the other
one</em>" went his own way, and Heaven only
knows where he was going. Instead of
taking me to Court, as he had been ordered
to do, he had drifted off so much to the left
that at the moment my soul caught him up,
he was at Madame de Hautcastel's door, half
a mile from the palace.

Now, I leave the reader to imagine what
would have happened if he had entered, all
alone, the abode of so lovely a lady.

<h2>VIII</h2>

If it is pleasant as well as useful to have
one's soul so far freed from the material
element that we can permit it to set out on
a solitary journey whenever we think fit, this
power has also its inconveniences. To this I
owe the burn of which I spoke in a preceding
chapter. Generally I entrust to my animal the
duty of preparing my breakfast; it is he who
makes the toast and cuts it in slices. He
makes admirable coffee and often drinks it with
out my soul meddling in any way, unless the
latter amuses itself with watching the animal
at work, but that seldom happens, and is a very
delicate operation; for it is easy when doing
some purely mechanical work to think of
something totally different, but it is extremely
difficult to watch oneself at work, so to speak
—or to explain what I mean according to my
method—to employ my soul in overlooking
the operations of my animal without directing them. This is the most astounding meta
physical feat a man can perform.

I had put my tongs on the embers in order
to make the toast, and some time after, while
my soul was travelling about, a blazing
ember jumped on the hearth—my poor animal
took hold of the tongs—and I burnt my
fingers.

<h2>IX</h2>

I hope I have developed my ideas in the
preceding chapter, sufficiently to give the
reader food for reflection, and to enable
him even to make discoveries for himself in
this magnificent field.
He will certainly be quite satisfied with
himself, if one day, he attains to the power
of making his soul travel by itself; the
pleasure that power will give him will counterbalance any inconveniences which may
result. Can anything be more delightful than
thus extending one's existence and dwelling
at the same time on earth and in heaven, and
in one word, so to speak, doubling one's being?
Is it not man's eternal and insatiable desire to
increase his powers and faculties, to wish to
be anywhere but where he is, to recall the
past, and to live in the future? He desires to
command armies, to preside over Academies,
to be adored by lovely women, and if he
attains to all this, he then pines for the fields,
for a peaceful country life, and envies the
shepherd's hut. His plans and hopes are
constantly wrecked amongst the misfortunes
inevitable to human nature, and he knows
not where to find happiness. A quarter of an
hour's journey with me will show him the
road.

Ah! why does he not abandon to
"<em>the other one</em>" that wretched care and ambition
which torment him? Come, poor wretch! make
an effort to burst your prison bars, and from
the height of heaven whither I am about to
lead you, from the midst of the celestial
worlds and the empyrean, behold the animal
launched the world to run the road of
fortune and honour all alone; see with what
solemnity it walks amongst men; the crowd
moves aside with respect, and, believe me, no
one will perceive that it is quite alone; it is not
of the least concern to the crowd, in the midst
of which it walks, to know whether or not it
has a soul or not or is a reasoning being. A
thousand sentimental women will love it to
distraction without ever finding it out; it can
even raise itself without the help of its soul to
the highest favour and place.

In a word, I should not be at all astonished
if, on our return from the empyrean, your soul
on entering its home were to find itself in
the animal of a noble lord.

<h2>X</h2>

But you must not imagine that, instead of
keeping my word and describing my journey round my chamber, I am beating about
the bush in order to get out of my engagement.
You would be making a great mistake, for my
journey is going on all the time, and, even while
my soul, analysing itselfin the preceding chapter,
was threading the tortuous windings of meta
physics, I was sitting in my arm-chair, in
which I was reclining so far back that its two
front legs were raised two inches from the
ground; whilst balancing myself from right to
left, and thus getting over the ground, I insensibly found myself close to the wall.

This is how I travel when not in
hurry — then my hand mechanically took hold
of the portrait of Madame Hautcastel, and
"<em>the other one</em>" busied himself with dusting
it. That employment gave him a tranquil
pleasure, and this was also communicated to
my soul, although it was then lost in the wide
fields of heaven; for it is well to observe that
when the spirit thus travels in space it is still
bound to the senses by I know not what secret
bond, so that, without interrupting its occupations it can join in the simple pleasures of
"<em>the other one</em>;" but if this enjoyment in
creases beyond a certain point, or if my soul is
struck bysome unexpected spectacle, immediately
it resumes its place—as quick as lightning.

And that is exactly what happened while I
was cleaning the portrait. As the cloth removed the dust and revealed the fair curling
locks and the garland of roses with which
they were crowned, my soul, even from the
planet whither it had migrated, felt a slight
tremor and sympathetically shared the joy of
my heart.

This pleasure became less confused and
more lively when the duster, by a single sweep,
revealed that radiant brow and that charming
face; my soul was on the point of quitting the
skies to enjoy the spectacle. But had it been
then engaged in the Elysian Fields in listening
to a concert of cherubims it would not have
remained there half a second longer, for its
companion, taking more and more interest in
his work, took upon himself to seize a wet sponge
and forthwith pass it over the eye—brows, the eyes,
—the nose, the cheek,—that mouth—Heavens!
my heart beats at the thought—over the chin, —the
bosom;—it was done in an instant, the wholefigure
seemed to spring into existence out of nothing.

My soul shot down from heaven like a fall
ing star and found "<em>the other one</em>" in a state of
ecstacy, which she herself increased by sharing it.
In that strange and unexpected situation, time
and space were forgotten. I lived for a moment
in the past and became young again, contrary
to nature's law. Yes! there is that adorable
woman, it is her very self, I see her smile, she
is about to speak and say she loves me—what a
glance! Come, let me fold you to my heart, soul
of my life, my second self, come and share my
rapture and happiness!

The moment was short but ravishing; cool
reason soon resumed its sway, and in the twink
ling of an eye I grew a whole year older— my
heart became icy cold—and I found myself on
a level with the dull crowd which cumbers the
earth.

<h2>XII</h2>

We must not anticipate — my eagerness to
communicate to the reader my theory
of soul and animal has caused me to
postpone the description of my bed longer than
I ought; and when I have finished that I will
resume my journey at the point where I was
interrupted in the preceding chapter. I only
beg you to remember that we have left my other
half in possession of the portrait of Madame de
Hautcastel, close against the wall, four steps
from my bureau. In speaking of my bed, I for
got to advise every one, if possible, to have
their bed hangings of white and pink, for it is
certain that colours influence us considerably
and can make us gay or sad according to their
hues.

Now pink and white are the two colours consecrated to pleasure and happiness. Nature by
giving these tints to the rose has made her the
Empress of the Kingdom of flowers, and when
the morning sky promises a fine day the clouds
ofsunrise are suffused with these same charming
colours.

One day, as we were with some difficulty,
ascending a steep path the lovely Rosalie was in
front, her agility lent her wings, and we were
unable to keep up with her— all at once, having
reached the top of a hillock, she turned towards
us to take breath and laughed at our slowness.
Never, perhaps, had the two colours which I am
now praising appeared so triumphant.

Her flushed cheeks, her coral lips, her pearly
teeth, her alabaster neck, all these on a back
ground of green struck our attention. I was
compelled to stop and admire—I say nothing
of her blue eyes nor of the glance she turned on
me, because I should be going beyond my subject, and, besides, I try to think about them
as little as possible. It is sufficient to have
given the most beautiful illustration of the superiority of these colours over all others and of
their influence on the happiness of man.

I will not go any further to-day— what other
subject can I mention which would not be insipid!
Does not the very thought of these things
efface all others? I don't even know when I
shall be able to set to work again. If I do go
on with it and the reader is desirous to see it
finished, let him address himself to the good
spirit who sends us ideas, and request him not to
mingle the recollection of that hillock with the
crowd of disconnected fancies which it sends
me every moment— without this precaution, my
journey will end here.

<h2>XII</h2>
The Hillock.
* * *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


<h3>XIII</h3>

My efforts are in vain—I must put off the
excursion and stop here whether I will
or no—I am compelled to make a temporary halt.

<h3>XIV</h3>

I said that I was singularly fond of meditating in the pleasant warmth of my bed, and that it's agreeable colour contributed very
much to the pleasure I found in so doing.

In order to ensure me this pleasure, my servant has orders to enter my room half an hour
before the time I intend to get up. hear him
walking about on tiptoe and carefully putting the
things in order, and that noise mingles agree
ably with my dreams and affords me a delicious
pleasure which is unknown to most people.

You are sufficiently awake to perceive that
you are not quite so, and are able to surmise in
a confused sort of way that the time for business
and its worries is still in the hour-glass of time.
Gradually my man makes more noise—it is so
difficult for him to restrain himself— he knows
that the fatal moment is at hand. He looks at
my watch and rattles the charms to warn me,
but I turn a deaf ear to him, and, in order to
prolong the entrancing moment, I practice every
sort of deception on this unfortunate fellow. I
give him orders to gain time. He knows very
well that these orders, which I give him some
what crossly, are only excuses for my remaining
in bed without appearing to desire to do so,
but he pretends not to notice this, and I am
heartily grateful to him.

At last, when I have exhausted all my subterfuges, he advances into the middle of the
roorn and plants himself there with his arms
folded, perfectly still.

It must be admitted that it would be impossible for him to show his disapproval of my
state of mind with more discretion and tact,
and. I never resist this silent challenge. I
stretch out my arms to show him that I under
stand, and get up at once.

If the reader will think over the conduct of
my servant, he will be convinced that in certain
delicate matters, such as those above mentioned,
simplicity and good sense are of infinitely more
avail than the sharpest wit. I venture to
assert that the most studied discourse on the
evil consequences of laziness would not induce
me to get up as quickly as the silent reproaches
of M. Joannetti.

He is a thoroughly good fellow this M. Joannetti, and at the same time the most suitable
servant for a traveller such as I am. He is accustomed to my soul's frequent excursions, and never
laughs at the inconsistencies of "<em>the other one</em>."
Sometimes he even guides it when it is alone,
so that you might say it was then under the
guidance of two souls. When it is dressing, for
instance, he warns me by a sign that "<em>the other one</em>" is on the point of putting on his stockings
inside out or his coat before his waistcoat.

My soul is often amused to see poor Joannetti running after the idiot under the arches of
the citadel to remind it that it has forgotten its
hat, or, at another time, its handkerchief.

One day, I must confess, had it not been for
this faithful domestic, who caught it up at the
bottom of the stairs, this silly creature would
have gone to Court without its sword, as bold
as the grand master of the ceremonies carrying
his wand of state.

<h2>XV</h2>

"Here, Joannetti," said I, "hang up this
portrait again." He had helped me
to dust it, and had no more idea of
the cause of the chapter about the portrait
than he had of what was going on in the moon.

He it was who, of his own accord, offered me
the damp sponge, and, by this apparently unimportant act, caused my soul to rush through a
hundred million leagues in a moment. Instead
of putting the picture back in its place he was
holding it in order to wipe it in his turn. Some difficulty, or some problem to be solved,
gave him an inquiring air, which I observed.
"Well," said I, "what fault do you find with that
portrait?" "Oh, nothing Sir, but yet—"

He placed it upright on one of the shelves of
my bureau, and, stepping back a few paces,
"I wish, Sir," said he "that you would explain
to me why this portrait always looks at me in
whatever part of the room I may be? In the
morning when I make the bed her face turns
towards me, and if I go to the window she still
follows me with her eyes all the way." "So
that, Joannetti," said I, "if the room were
full of people this beautiful lady would look
at everyone at once." "Yes, Sir." "And
would she smile on everybody as she does
on me?" Joannetti made no answer. I
stretched myself in my arm-chair and gave
myself up to the most serious reflections. What
a ray of light! Poor lover, while you are
shivering with cold, far from your mistress, in
whose heart someone has perhaps already
supplanted you, while you greedily devour the
portrait with your eyes and imagine that (at
least in the painting) her eyes are fixed on you
alone, the deceitful image, as unfaithful as the
original, showers her glances all around and
smiles on everybody. Behold a moral likeness
between certain portraits and their originals,
which no philosopher, painter, or observer has
ever noticed before.

I proceed from one discovery to another!

<h2>XIV</h2>

Joannetti was still in the same attitude,
awaiting the explanation for which he had
asked. I raised my head from the folds
of my travelling coat, where I had buried it in
order to think more at my ease and to compose
myself after the sad reflections I have already
related.

"Don't you see, Joannetti," said I, after
moment's silence turning my arm-chair
towards him, "don't you see that a picture
being a plane surface, the rays of light which
are reflected from every point of that surface—?"
Joannetti, at this explanation,
opened his eyes so wide that I saw the whole of
his eye-balls, he also had his mouth open, and
these two movements of the human face denote,
according to the famous Le Brun, the highest
pitch of astonishment. It was my animal, without doubt, who had begun a dissertation of this
kind, for my soul knew quite well that Joannetti was completely ignorant of the nature of a
plane surface, or still more of rays of light.
The prodigious stare he gave brought me to
myself, and I withdrew my head into the collar
of my travelling coat and was so buried in it
that I was almost entirely hidden.

At this point I determined to dine. The
morning was far spent, and one more stage in
my journey would have put off my dinner till
evening.

I slid to the edge of my arm-chair, and
putting my feet on the chimney-piece, waited
patiently for my repast.

This latter is a delightful attitude, and I
think it would be very difficult to find another
which combines so many advantages and is so
convenient for the inevitable halts on a long
journey.

At such times Rosine, my faithful dog, never
fails to tug at the skirt of my travelling coat to
make me take her up in my lap; there she finds,
all ready for her, a very comfortable bed at the
apex of the angle formed by the two portions
of my body. A capital V admirably represents
my attitude.

Rosine jumps into my lap if I don't take her
up as quickly as she wishes, and I often find her
there without knowing how she got up. My
hands arrange themselves mechanically in the
manner best adapted for her comfort; whether
there be some bond of sympathy between that
amiable animal and mine, or whether it is a
pure matter of chance—but I do not believe
in chance, that wretched theory— that mean
ingless word—I would rather believe in mag
netismn or mysticism. No I will never believe
in it.

There is so much reality in the connexion
which exists between these two animals that
when I place my feet on the chimney-piece in
entire abstraction; when the hour of dinner is
still a long way off and I am not even thinking
of taking in supplies, Rosine, always aroused by
this movement, shows her pleasure by gently
wagging her tail; she wisely keeps her place
and "<em>the other one</em>" perceives this and is duly
grateful, although incapable of reasoning on its
cause, and thus a mute dialogue is established
between them and a community of very
agreeable sensations which cannot possibly be
attributed to chance.

<h2>XVII</h2>N
Accuse me not of being prolix in
matters of detail—that is the way of
travellers. When we are about to
ascend Mount Blanc, or Etna, we fail not to
describe minutely the smallest particulars; the
number of the party and the mules, the quality
of the provisions, the excellent appetite of the
travellers, everything, even to the stumbling of
the animals, is most carefully recorded in the
diary for the instruction of those who sit at
home. On this principle I have resolved to
speak of my dear Rosine, a most amiable
animal, which I love with a real affection, and
to her I devote this entire chapter.

During the last six years we have lived
together there has not been the least coolness
between us, or if ever there has arisen somee
trifling misunderstanding, I declare, in good
faith, that the fault has always been on my side
and Rosine has always made the first overtures
towards reconciliation.

At night, if she has been scolded, she goes to
bed sadly and without a murmur, the next
morning, at daybreak, she is at my bedside in a
respectful attitude, and at the least movement
of her master, or sign of his waking, she makes
known her presence by rapping furiously with
her tail on the table by my bed.

And why should I refuse my affection to this
caressing creature, who has never ceased to
love me since the moment we began to live
together?

I cannot remember how many people have
taken an interest in me and have forgotten me;
I have had some friends, several mistresses, a
crowd of intimates, and even more of acquaint
ances, and <em>now</em> I am nothing to all the world,
which has even forgotten my name.

What protestations! What offers of service!
I could rely on their fortune and on their eternal
friendship!

My dear Rosine, who has never offered me
her services, has rendered me the greatest ser
vice one can offer to man. She loved me
yesterday and she loves me to-day, so I do not
hesitate to declare that I regard her with a
portion of the same affection which I have for
my friends. Let the world say what it will.

<h2>XVIII</h2>
We left Joannetti standing motionless
before me in an attitude of astonish
ment, waiting for the conclusion of the
sublime explanation I had commenced.

When he saw me bury my head entirely in
my dressing gown, and so make an end of
my dissertation, he thought at once that I had
stopped short for want of an answer, and that
consequently he had puzzled me by the difficulty
he had propounded.

In spite of the advantage he had gained over
me, he did not show the least sign of triumph
or try to profit by it. After a moment's
silence he took the portrait and hung it
up in its place and retired lightly on tip-toe.
He perceived that his presence was a sort of
humiliation for me, and his delicacy prompted
him to retire unobserved. His behaviour on
this occasion interested me exceedingly and
placed him higher than ever in my affection.

Doubtless he will also find a place in the
reader's, and if anyone is sufficiently hard
hearted to refuse that to him, after reading the
following chapter, without doubt, he must have
a heart of stone.

<h2>XIX</h2>

"Good Heavens," said I to him one day, "this is the third time I have told you
to buy me a brush. What a block-head!
What a fool you are!" He did not answer a
word—he had not replied the evening before to
a similar insult. "He is usually so reliable,"
said I, "I can't make it out." "Go and get a
cloth to clean my shoes" said I to him, angrily.
While he was gone I repented for having scolded
him. My anger passed away altogether when
I saw the care with which he removed the dust
from my shoes without touching my stockings.
I laid my hand on his as a mark of recon
cilliation. "Ah!" said I to myself, "<em>can</em>
there then be people willing to clean other
people's shoes for money? " — that word "money"
came upon me like a flash of light. I suddenly remembered that it was a long time
since I had given my servant any. "Joannetti," said I, drawing back my foot," have you
got any money?" A slight smile of justification
appeared on his lips at that question. "No,
sir, for the last few days I have not had a sou.
I spent all I had on your little purchases."
"And the brush? That accounts for it, no doubt!" He smiled again. He might easily
have said to his master "No, I am not the
empty-headed fellow, the creature, as you are
cruel enough to call your faithful servant; pay
me the twenty-three livres, ten sous, and four
centimes you owe me and I will buy you your
brush." He permitted himself to be treated
unjustly rather than make his master blush for
his anger. May Heaven bless him!

Ye philosophers and Christians! what think
ye of this!

"Come, Joannetti," said I, "go and buy
the brush." "But, sir, you cannot remain
thus, with one shoe clean and the other dirty?"
Go, I tell you, buy the brush, leave the dust
on my shoe." He went out—I took up the
duster and daintily cleaned my left shoe, on
which I let fall a tear of repentance.

<h2>XX</h2>

The walls of my room are furnished with
engravings and pictures which adorn it
greatly, and I wish with all my heart that
I could shew them to the reader in order to
amuse him and so shorten the length of the journey which lies before us, before we reach my bureau; but it is as impossible to explain a picture
clearly as it is to paint a likeness from a description.

With what emotion would he not contemplate the first print before us? There he
would see the unfortunate Charlotte, lightly,
and with a trembling hand, dusting Albert's
pistols.* While dark forbodings and all the
agony of hopeless and inconsolable love are
imprinted on her face, the cold-hearted Albert
appears surrounded with his bags of old law
papers, and coolly bids good bye to his friend.
How often I have been tempted to break the
glass which covers that engraving, to snatch
Albert from his table, to tear him in pieces
and trample him under foot? But there will
always be too many Alberts in this world. Is
there anyone who has not such an one with
whom he is obliged to live, and against whom
the out-pourings of his soul, the sweet emotions
of his heart and the flights of his imagination
dash themselves as the waves on the rocks?

Happy the man who finds a friend with a soul
in sympathy with his own, a friend who is united
to him by similarity of tastes, opinions, and pursuits, a friendship not to be warped by ambition
or interest—which prefers the shade of trees to
the pomp of Courts. Happy the man who has
a friend!

<h2>XXI</h2>

I had one,—death has taken him from me,
she snatched him away at the beginning
of his career, at the moment his friendship
had become essential to my being. Together
we endured the toils of war, one pipe sufficed
for both of us, we drank out of the same cup,
and slept under the same tent. In whatever
wretched state we happened to be, the place
seemed to us a new fatherland. I have seen
him exposed to all the dangers of a disastrous
Death appeared to spare us for one
another, a thousand times she threw her
arrows around him without touching him, but it
was only to make his loss the more bitter to me.
The tumult of war, the excitement which fills
the breast at the appearance of danger, would
perhaps have prevented his cries from piercing
my heart. His death would have been useful
to his country and harmful to its foes. I should
then have regretted it less, but to lose him in
the midst of the pleasures of winter-quarters, to
see him die in my arms when he appeared in
perfect health, at the moment when our friend.
ship was being cemented by repose and tran
quillity! Alas! I shall never be comforted.
His memory now lives in my heart alone, his
companions and successors have forgotten him;
it is this thought which makes me feel his loss
the more keenly.

Nature, also, careless of the fate of individuals, puts on once more, in spring-time her
lovely dress and unfolds all her beauty around
the cemetery where he sleeps. The trees put
forth their leaves and interlace their branches,
the birds sing in their shade, the insects hum
amongst the flowers, everything breathes of joy
and life amidst this resting place of the dead;
and at night, when the moon lights up the sky and
I meditate in that sad spot, I hear the cricket
hidden in the grass which covers the silent tomb
of my friend gaily pouring out its endless song.
The cruel destruction of men and all the sorrows of humanity, count for nothing in the
grand total. The death of a rational being,
who dies in the midst of his bereaved friends
and that of a butterfly which the frosty air of
morning kills in the calyx of a flower, are like
events in the course of nature.

Man is nought but a phantom,—a shade, a
vapour that melts into thin air. But the dawn
begins to whiten the sky and the dark thoughts
which troubled me have fled with the night,
hope springs up again in my breast. No! He
Who thus floods the East with light has not
made it shine so brightly, in order to plunge
me later into the night of despair. He Who
has laid out this infinite expanse of Heaven
and Who has raised these enormous
tains, whose icy summits the sun
now gilding, has also endowed me with life and
No, my friend is not dead; what
ever barrier separates us, I shall see him
again. I base my hopes on no idle words,
the flight of an insect in the air is enough to
convince me of this, and often the landscape,
the balmy air, and the indescribable charm all
around me so exalts my thoughts, that an
unconquerable conviction of immortality forcibly fills my whole being.

<h2>XXII</h2>
For a long time time past, the chapter I
have just written has been on the tip
of my pen and I have always put it aside.
I had promised myself that, in this book, only
the smiling face of my soul should appear, but
this intention, like so many others, came to
naught.

I hope that the sympathetic reader will
pardon me for having caused him to shed some
tears, and if any one really believed that I
ought to have omitted that chapter, he can cut
it out of his copy or even throw the book into
the fire.

It is enough for me if you are pleased
with it, my dear Jenny, you, the best and
most beloved; to you I dedicate my book;
if it meets with your approbation it will have
that of all feeling and tender hearts, and if
you forgive the follies which in spite of myself
sometimes escape me, I will brave the censure
of all the world.

<h2>XXIII</h2>
I will only say a word on the next
engraving.

It represents the family of the unhappy
Ugolo dying of hunger, beside him, one of
his sons lies motionless; at his feet the others
stretch out their enfeebled arms demanding
bread, while the wretched father, leaning
against a pillar in the prison, his eyes
fixed and wild, his countenance immovable in
the terrible tranquility which marks the last
stage of despair, undergoes at the same time,
his own death and that of all his children, and
suffers all that human nature can endure.

And there is the brave Chevalier of Assas
falling under a hundred bayonets with a courage
and heroism unknown in our time.

And you unfortunate negress, weeping under
those palm tress, you, whom a barbarian, who
doubtless was no Englishman, has betrayed and
deserted—what shall I say of you? You, whom
he had the cruelty to sell as a wretched slave in
spite of your love and your services, in spite of
the fruit of his affections, the pledge of which
you carry in your bosom,—I will not pass by
your portrait without rendering the homage due
to your sensibility and misfortunes.

Let us halt a moment before this other picture. It is that of a young shepherdess who,
all alone, watches her flock in the high Alps.
She is sitting on the stump of an old fir tree,
overthrown and blanched by many winters.
Her feet are covered by the large leaves of a
tuft of cacalia whose lilac flowers bloom above
her head. Lavender, wild thyme, anemone,
centaury, all those flowers which we cultivate
with difficulty in our conservatories and gardens,
and which live on the Alps in all their primitive
beauty, make a brilliant carpet on which her
sheep are straying. Lovely shepherdess, tell
me where I can find the happy nook where you
dwell? and from what far sheep-fold did you
set out at sunrise this morning? May I not
go there and live with you? But alas!
the sweet tranquillity which you enjoy will
soon vanish the demon of war, not content
with ravaging cities will soon bring trouble and
dismay even to your secluded retreat. The
soldiers are already on the march; I see them
climbing peak after peak and approaching the
clouds. The roar of the cannon is heard in the
lofty home of the thunder. Fly! shepherdess,
fly! hurry on your flock, hide yourself in the
wildest and most retired caves—there is no
more repose on this sad earth.

<h2>XXIV</h2>
I don't know how it happens, but for some time past
my chapters have
always ended in mournful strain.
In vain I fix my mind on some agreeable object
—in vain I start in fair weather, I soon meet
with a squall which drives me to leeward. To
end this agitation which upsets my thoughts,
and to still the beating of my heart which is too
deeply disturbed by so many sad thoughts, I see
no other remedy than a dissertation. Yes, thus
will I steel my heart!

And this dissertation shall be about painting, for I cannot discourse on any other
subject.

I cannot descend all at once from the height
I was at just now— besides, it is "my uncle
Toby's hobby."

I should like to say, <i xml:lang="fr">en passant</i>, a few words
on the question whether painting or music is
the more delightful art. Yes, I must place
something in the scale, if only a grain of sand
an atom.

In favour of painting, we say, that it leaves
something behind it, pictures survive and keep
its memory alive. To this it is replied that
musical composers also leave operas and concerted pieces; but music is subject to fashion
and painting is not. The fragments of music
which enchanted our ancestors are ridiculed by
the amateurs of the present day, and they are
put into comic operas to make the present
generation laugh at what their ancestors used
to weep.

The pictures of Raphael will delight our
children as they have charmed our forefathers.
There now you have my grain of sand.

<h2>XXV</h2>

"But what does it matter to me?" said
Mademoiselle Haucastel on one occasion, "that the music of Cherubini or
Cimarosa differs from that of their predecessors?
What matterifthe ancient music makes me laugh
provided that the new affects me so charmingly! Is it necessary to my happiness that
my amusements should resemble those of my
great grandmother? Why talk of painting, an
art which is understood by a very small class of
persons, whilst music enchants all?" At this
moment, I don't know how I can answer this
remark, which I had not foreseen at the
beginning of this chapter.

If I had, perhaps I should not have
undertaken this dissertation, and the reader
must not think that this is the artifice of a
musician. On my honour I am not a musician.
Certainly not.

I call heaven to witness and all those who
have heard me play on the violin.

But even supposing the merit of the one art
to be equal to that of the other, we should not
too quickly decide on the value of an art by
that of the artist.

We find children who play on the harpiscord
like first-rate masters— no one has ever seen a
good twelve years old painter. Painting, besides
taste and sentiment, requires deep thought,
which musicians can do without. Every day
we hear men without brains or feeling produce
ravishing music from the violin and the harp.

We can educate the human animal to play on
the harpiscord, and when it is taught by a good
master the soul can wander at will while the
fingers mechanically extract the sounds with
which it does not in any way concern itself.
On the other hand we cannot paint the simplest
thing in the world without employing all the
faculties of the soul.

If, however, anyone should endeavour to
distinguish between the composition and the
execution of music I confess that I should be
somewhat embarrassed. Alas! if all writers
of dissertations were honest, they would conclude as I do.

In beginning to examine a subject we generally assume a dogmatic tone because we have
secretly made up our mind, as I had really done
in the matter of painting, in spite of my hypocritical show of impartiality, but discussion
arouses objection and everything ends in doubt.

<h2>XXVI</h2>
Now that I am more tranquil I am going
to endeavour to speak without emotion
of the two portraits which follow "The
Shepherdess of the Alps."

Raphael! thy portrait could only have been
painted by thyself— who else would have dared
to undertake it? Thy countenance, open, sensitive, and <i xml:lang="fr">spirituelle</i> declares thy character and
genius.

In order to propitiate your shade I have
placed near to you the portrait of your mistress,
whom all men will for ever call to account for
the loss of the sublime works, of which your
premature death has deprived the arts.

When I examine the portrait of Raphael I
feel almost a religious veneration for that great
man, who in the bloom of youth had surpassed
all who went before him, and whose pictures
are the admiration and despair of modern
artists. My soul, even whilst admiring, feels a
touch of indignation against the Italian woman
who preferred her love to her lover, and who
extinguished in her bosom that heavenly spark
of divine genius.

Miserable woman! did you not know that
Raphael was even then contemplating a picture
superior to the Transfiguration?

Did you not know that you were folding in
your embrace the favourite of nature, the father
of enthusiasm, a sublime, a divine genius?

Whilst my soul made these observations, its
companion was fixing its attentive gaze on the
ravishing figure of that baneful beauty and felt
itself quite ready to forgive her for the death of
Raphael.

In vain my soul rebuked her for her extravagant weakness, she turned a deaf ear.

On these occasions there arises between these
two ladies a strange dialogue, which too often
ends in the triumph of the evil principle, and of
which I reserve a specimen for another chapter.


<h2>XXVII</h2>

The engravings and pictures of which I
have just been speaking, become dim and
vanish at the first glance which I cast on
the next one. The immortal works of Raphael,
Corregio, and all the Italian School could not
bear the comparison; so I keep it always
for the last, for the <i xml:lang="fr">pièce de réserve</i>, whenever
I give amateurs the pleasure of travelling
with me, and I can safely affirm that since
I have shown this sublime picture to connoisseurs and others—to people of fashion, to
artizans, to women and children, and even to
animals, I have always seen the beholders
express, each in his own way, signs of pleasure
and astonishment,—so admirably does it represent nature.

Ah! ladies and gentlemen, what picture can
I show you, what sight can I place before your
eyes more sure of your approbation than the
faithful representation of yourselves? The picture of which I spoke is a mirror, and no one
up to the present time has thought fit to criticise
for it shews to every beholder a perfect picture
and one to which there is nothing to object.

You will doubtless agree that it must be considered as one of the wonders of the country
in which I am travelling. I will pass over in
silence the pleasure the natural philosopher
feels in meditating on the strange phenomenon
of light which reflects every natural object from
the polished surface. The mirror offers to the
stay-at-home traveller a thousand interesting
reflections which render it useful and almost
invaluable.

You, whom love once held or still holds in
bondage, knowthat it is before a mirror that love
sharpens its arrows and lays its cruel plots;
there it rehearses its manoeuvres, studies its
motions, and prepares to carry on the war it is
about to declare. There it practices its sweet
looks, affected smiles, its sly poutings, as an
actor who rehearses alone before a glass before
presenting himself in public.

Ever impartial and truthful, a mirror reflects
the roses of youth and the wrinkles of age
without misrepresentation or flattery. Alone
amongst the counsellors of the great, it always
tells the truth.

This peculiarity made me long for the
invention of a moral mirror, in which all men
might see themselves with their vices and their
virtues. I even thought of giving a prize to
some Academy for this discovery until further
reflection proved its uselessness.

Alas! how seldom does ugliness recognise
itself and break the mirror. In vain do mirrors
multiply around us and reflect with geometrical
accuracy light and truth;—at the instant when
the rays are about to enter our eye and paint us
as we are, self-love slips in its deceiving prism
between us and our image, and shows us
divinity. And of all the prisms, since the first
which left the hands of the immortal Newton,
not one has possessed a force of refraction so
powerful or produced colours so agreeable and
lively as the prism of self-love.

Now, since common mirrors vainly declare
the truth and each is satisfied with his appear.
ance, and since they are unable to make known
to men their physical imperfections, of what
use would my moral mirror be? Few would
look into it and no one would recognise himself
therein— except the philosophers—and only a
few of them, I think.

In thus describing a mirror, I hope no one
will blame me for placing it above all the pictures of the Italian School. Ladies of faultless
taste, and whose word is law, generally cast
their first glance on this picture when they
enter a room. A thousand times, at balls, I
have seen ladies and even dandies forget their
lovers or their mistresses, the dance, and all
the pleasures of the fete, in order to regard with
a marked complaisance this enchanting picture,
and even honour it from time to time with a
glance, in the middle of the most animated
quadrille. Who then can refuse the exalted
position I have given to it amongst the chief
d'oeuvres of the painter's art?

<h2>XXVIII</h2>

At last I had nearly arrived at my bureau,
I was so near to it that by stretching
out my arm I could have touched the
corner nearest to me, when in a moment I was
on the point of seeing all the fruit of my labours
destroyed, and of losing my life. I should pass
over in silence the accident which happened to
me so as not to discourage travellers, but
it is so difficult to upset the post chaise in
which I travel, that one must really be most
unlucky—in fact as unlucky as I am—to experience a similar danger, I found myself
stretched at full length on the ground, completely upset, and that so quickly, so unexpectedly, that I should almost have been
tempted to doubt my misfortune, had not a
singing in my head and a severe pain in my
left shoulder too certainly proved its reality.
This, again, was a malicious trick of my other
half.

Startled by the voice of a poor man who
asked for alms at my door and by the barking
of Rosine, my other half suddenly turned my
arm-chair round before my soul had time to
warn it that it had lost its drag behind; the
shock was so great that my post chaise quite
lost its centre of gravity and turned over upon
me.

This was, I must confess, one of those occasions on which I had most to complain of my
soul, for instead of being vexed at her own absence
of mind which had caused the accident, she
so far forgot herself as to give way to the
most <em>animal</em> resentment, and roundly abused
the innocent cause of all this. "Idle rascal
go and work," said she,—execrable exhortation,
invented by cruel, miserly wealth.

"Sir," replied he, with a view of softening
my heart, "I come from Chambery."


" So much the worse for you."

"I am James; you have seen me there. I
used to drive the sheep to pasture."

"And what are you doing here?"

My soul began to regret the harshness of my
first words. I even believed she regretted
them a moment before they escaped her. In
like maner, when we come to a ditch or puddle
in the road, we see it but have not time to
avoid it.

Rosine finished the work of restoring me to
good sense and repentance — she had recognized
James, who had often shared his crust with her,
and she showed her remembrance and gratitude
by her caresses. Meanwhile Joannetti having
collected the remains of my dinner, which were
destined for his own, gave them to James with
out hesitation.

Poor Joannetti!

Thus it is, that in my journey, I am continually
learning lessons of philosophy and humanity
from my servant and my dog.

<h2>XXIX</h2>
Before going farther I wish to dispel a
suspicion my readers may perhaps have
entertained.

I would not for all the world that any one
should suppose that I have only undertaken this
journey because I did not know what to do and
in some measure compelled by circumstances.
I declare by all that I hold sacred I had the
idea of undertaking it long before the event
took place which caused me to become a
prisoner for forty-two days. This enforced
retirement was only the cause of my setting
out a little sooner.

I know that some folk will suspect the truth
of this gratuitous protestation, but I know also
that suspicious people will not read this book.
They have plenty to do at home and amongst
their friends, they are fully occupied with other
matters—but all good folks will believe me.

However, I confess, I should have preferred
to undertake this journey at another time of
year; say rather during Lent than at the Car
nival. But the philosophical reflections with
which I have been inspired, have helped me very
much to bear the loss of the pleasures which
Turin offers so bountifully at this time of bustle
and excitement.

It is very true the walls of my room are not
as magnificently decorated as those of a ball
room, the silence of my retreat cannot rival the
pleasant sounds of music and dancing—but
amongst the fine people one ineets at these
fêtes some are certainly more bored than I am.

And why should I do nothing but think of
those who are in a more fortunate situation,
whilst the world swarms with unfortunates who
are worse off than I am?

Instead of transporting myself in imagination
to that grand ball room, where so many beauties
are eclipsed by the young Eugénie, I have only
to stop a moment on the road thither in order
to see how happy I am. At the very doors of
those luxurious rooms lies a crowd of unfortunates half-naked and half dead with hunger
and misery.

What a sight! I would that all the world
might read this page of my book, would that
everybody knew that in this town, the abode of
wealth, a crowd of wretches sleep in the open
air on the coldest winter nights with the threshold of a palace for their pillow! See here is a
group of children huddled together lest they
perish with cold— there is a trembling woman
speechless in her misery. People come and go
unmoved by sights with which they are so
familiar. The roar of carriages, the shouts of
revelry, the ravishing sounds of music, mingle
with the cries of these unfortunates and create
a terrible discord.

<h2>XXX</h2>

If any one were hastily to condemn a whole
town afterreading the last chapter he would
be much mistaken. I have spoken of the
poor inhabitants and their heart-rending cries
and of the indifference with which some people
regard them, but I have said nothing of the
hosts of charitable people who sleep whilst
others amuse themselves and who rise at dawn
to help the unfortunate, unseen and without
ostentation. No, I will pass this over in
silence. I will write it on the reverse of that
page which all the world must read.

After having thus shared their goods with
their brethren, and brought comfort to those
sorrow-stricken hearts, they go to church (while
wearied vice sleeps on eider-down) to offer up
their prayers to God and to return thanks for
His mercies;—while the light of the solitary
lamp still struggles in the sanctuary with that of
the coming day, they are already prostrate
before the altar,—and the Almighty angered
by the hard heartedness and greed of man
kind still withholds His arm!

<h2>XXXI</h2>

I was anxious to say something in my
travels about these poor creatures, because
the thought of their wretchedness often
troubles me by the road. Sometimes, struck
by the difference between their condition and
my own I have suddenly stopped my coach and
thought my room extravagantly furnished.
What useless luxury! Six chairs, two tables,
a bureau, a looking glass, what vain show!
Above all, my bed with its pink and white
hangings, and its two mattresses, seemed to
rival the magnificence and the effeminacy of
Asiatic monarchs.

These thoughts made me indifferent to the
pleasures I had been forbidden, and as I passed
from one reflection to another I became so
philosophical that I could have seen a ball
going on in the next room and heard the music
of violins and flutes without stirring. I could
have listened to the Marchesine's melodious
voice, which has so often transported me; yes,
I could have heard even <em>that</em> without being
moved. Nay, more, I could have beheld the
most lovely woman in Turin, Eugenié herself,
decked out from head to foot by Mademoiselle
Rassoux, without the least emotion.—But I am
not quite sure about this.

<h2>XXXII</h2>
But, gentlemen, allow me to inquire, do
you enjoy a ball or a play as much as
you used to do? For myself, I confess,
that for some time past all crowds inspire me
with terror. I am assailed by a dreadful dream.
Vainly I try to drive it away, it continually
returns, like the dream of Athalie. Perhaps
this is because the soul, overwhelmed to-day
with dark fancies and heart— rending pictures,
sees sadness everywhere, just as a disordered
stomach turns the most wholesome food to
poison. However, be this as it may, my dream
is as follows:— When I am at one of these fêtes
amongst that crowd of pleasant good-natured
men dancing and singing or weeping at tragedies, who are all enjoyment, frankness and
ease, I say to myself, "If amongst this polite
assembly, a white bear, a philosopher, a tiger
or some animal of that sort were suddenly to
enter, and mounting the orchestra shout out at
the top of his voice, 'Wretched beings! listen
to the words of truth, you are oppressed, tyrannized over, miserable and bored! shake off this
lethargy! Ye musicians begin by breaking
your instruments on each others heads, and let
each one arm himself with a poignard. Think
no more about recreation and festivals— climb
to the boxes and slay everybody there. Let
even the women steep their timid hands in
blood!
"'Arise, you are free! Tear your king from
his throne, your God from his sanctuary!'
"Well, how many of these charming fellows
would obey? How many of them do you
think
dreamed of any such deeds before they came
here. Who knows? Was there no dancing in
Paris five years ago?*
"Joannetti, shut the doors and windows! I
no longer wish to see the light. Let no one
enter my room. Put my sword within reach.
Go out yourself and keep out of my sight!"

<h2>XXXIII</h2>

"No, no! stay Joannetti, stay my poor
lad, and you too, dear Rosine, you
who sympathize with my troubles and
soften them by your caresses; come, dear
Rosine, jump up into your resting place."

<h2>XXXIV</h2>

The overturning of my post chaise has
done the reader the service of shortening my journey by a good dozen
chapters, for when I picked myself up, I
found I was opposite and close to my bureau,
and I had no more time to make any reflections
upon a number of engravings and pictures
which had yet to be inspected, and which
might have considerably prolonged my discourse on painting.

Leaving then, on the right, the portraits of
Raphael and his mistress, the Chevalier d'Assas
and the Shepherdess of the Alps, and going
along to the left side of the window we find my
bureau. This is the first and most prominent
object which meets the traveller's eye on the
road I have indicated.

It is surmounted by shelves for books, and
the whole is crowned by a bust which forms the
apex of the pyramid and contributes most to
the embellishment of the scene.

Upon drawing out the top right hand drawer
we find an inkstand, paper of all kinds, pens
ready cut, and sealing wax. Everything to
inspire the laziest person with the desire of
writing. I am sure, my dear Jenny, that if by
chance you were to open this drawer you would
answer that letter I wrote to you a year ago.
In the opposite drawer lies a confused heap of
materials for the interesting history of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The
Prisoner of Pignerol</i>, which, my dear friends, you
will read shortly.

Between these two drawers is a recess where
I throw all my letters just as I receive them.
You will find there all those I have received
during the last ten years. The older ones are
arranged according to their dates in several
bundles. The new ones lie pell-mell. I have
also several which date from my early years.

What a pleasure it is to recall by these letters
the interesting scenes of our early years and to
be carried back again to those happy days which
we shall see no more.

Yes, my heart is full; how pleasing is the
sadness when my eyes wander over the lines
traced by one who is gone for ever!

See, his handwriting! and his heart guided
his hand. To <em>me</em> he wrote this letter and it is
all that I have left of him!

When I put my hand into this receptacle I
seldom leave the spot for the whole day, just as a
traveller passes rapidly through some provinces
of Italy, making in his haste some trivial
observations and on reaching Rome will stay
for months!

This is the richest vein in the mine I explore.
What changes in my ideas and sentiments;
what a difference in my friends! When I
compare them as they were in the past with
what they are to-day I see them most deeply
agitated about matters which no longer disturb
them at all.

We regarded some event as a great misfortune, but the end of the letter is wanting
and the event is entirely forgotten; I have no
idea what it was. Then a thousand prejudices
assailed us, utterly ignorant as we were both
of mankind and the world. But how warm our
affection, how close our friendship, how unbounded our confidence!

We were happy in our ignorance — and now
—yes, all is changed—we have been compelled,
like the rest of the world, to read the human
heart, and truth, falling like a bomb into the
midst of us, has destroyed for ever that fairy
palace of dreamland.

<em>XXXV</em>

I could easily write a chapter on that
withered rose if it were worth the trouble.
It is a flower of last year's Carnival. I went
myself to gather it in the Valentino Gardens in
the evening, an hour before the ball, and full of
hope and pleasant emotion proceeded to offer it
to Mademoiselle Haucastel. She took the rose
and laid it on her toilet table without looking
either at it or me. But how could she pay any
attention to me while she was so much engaged
with herself? Standing before a large mirror
all ready dressed and giving the last touch to
her toilet she was entirely pre-occupied; her
attention was so completely absorbed by her
ribbons, laces and all kinds of trinkets heaped
up before her, that I could not get even a look
or a sign of recognition—I resigned myself
accordingly. Humbly I held some pins for her
arranged in order, but as her pincushion was
more handy for her, she took them from it; or if
I put out my hand she took them from me
quite indifferently, and in taking them she
groped about without turning her eyes from
her mirror for fear of losing sight of herself.
For some time I held a second mirror behind
her so that she might have a better view of her
head-dress, and as her form was reflected
from one mirror to the other I beheld a series
of coquettes, not one of whom paid me the
least attention. I must confess that my rose and
I cut but sorry figures. At last I lost patience,
and unable to control the vexation which consumed me, I put down the mirror and went
out in a rage without saying good-bye.

"Are you going?" said she, turning herself
so as to obtain a view of her profile. I made
no reply, but listened for some time at the door,
in order to see what effect my abrupt departure
might produce.

"Do you not see," said she to her maid,
after a moment's silence, "do you not see that
this caraco, particularly the lower part, is much
too large for my waist,—you must make it
fit with pins."

I shall certainly not explain why that dead
rose is on the shelf of my bureau; because
have I not already said that a dead rose does
not deserve a chapter?

Ladies, observe that I do not moralise in any
way on that story of the dead rose; I do not say
that Mademoiselle Haucastel did well or ill in
preferring her toilet to me, nor that I had any
right to be received differently. I am especially careful not to draw any general conclusions
as to the reality, strength, or duration of the
affection of ladies for their friends. It is enough
for me to launch this chapter (since it has become
one) upon the world with the rest of my journey,
without addressing it or recommending it to the
notice of any one in particular.

Gentlemen! I will only add a word of advice
to you; remember if you please that on the night
of a ball your mistress is no longer yours. When
the toilet begins, the lover is no more than a
husband, and the ball takes the place of the
lover. Besides we all know how a husband
fares when he tries to compel his wife's love
so bear your trial with patience and jest over it.
And do not deceive yourself if she smiles on you
at a ball; it is because you are a part of the
ball and consequently a portion of her new
conquest; you are the hundredth part of her
lover:—or it may be, you dance well and can
make her shine thereby:—in short the most
flattering view that you can take of her favours
is, that she hopes to excite the jealousy of her
rivals by showing off such a deserving fellow
as you, as her admirer. If it were not for this
she would not even look at you.

Now I think we understand this thoroughly;
you must resign yourself to fate and wait till the
husband rôle is played out. I know a good
many who would he glad to get off so cheaply.

<h2>XXXVI</h2>

I promised to report a dialogue between
my soul and "<em>the other one</em>," but certain
chapters always give me slip, or rather,
others fall from my pen in spite of myself and
upset all my pre-arranged plans. The chapter
about my library is one of them, and I must
make it as short as possible. The end of the
forty-two days is at hand, and another similar
period would not suffice to enable me to finish
my account of that rich country in which I
am travelling so pleasantly.

Well, my library consists of novels if I must
tell you — of novels and a few select poets.

As if I had not sufficient troubles of my own,
I once more voluntarily share those ofa thousand
imaginary persons and feel them as acutely as
my own. What tears have I not shed for the
ill-fated Clarissa and for Charlotte's Lover!

But if I thus seek out imaginary sorrows,
I find such virtue, goodness, and unselfish
ness in this imaginary world as I have
never yet found in the real world around me.
There I meet a woman after my heart's desire,
without ill-temper, frivolity, or insincerity. I
speak not of her beauty, I leave that to my
imagination and picture her lovely beyond all
criticism, then, closing the book, which does not
keep pace with my thoughts, I take her hand
and together we stray through a country a
thousand times more delightful than the Garden
of Eden itself. What painter could delineate
that enchanted spot in which I have enshrined
my heart's divinity, and what poet could ever
describe the lively and varied sensations I feel
in those delightful regions?

How often have I cursed that Cleveland who
is always embarking on new troubles which he
might avoid! I cannot bear that book and its
endless chain of misfortunes, but if I open it at
random I must read it to the very end.

How could one leave the poor man among the
Abaquis? What would become of him among
those savages? Still less dare I desert him in
the attempt he makes to regain his liberty. In
fact, I enter so completely into his difficulties,
I feel so great an interest in him and his
unfortunate family that the unexpected appear
ance of the savage Ruintors makes my hair
stand on end. When I read this passage I
break into a cold perspiration and my fright is
as vivid and real as if I myself were being
roasted and eaten by those ruffians. When I
have had enough of tears and love-making,
I choose some poet and start off afresh for some
other world.

<h2>XXXVII</h2>

From the voyage of the Argonauts to the
Assembly of the Notables, from the lowest
depths of Hell to the furthest fixed star
beyond the Milky Way, as far as the confines
of Heaven and the gates of Chaos, behold the
vast arena where I roam at will and at leisure
—for I am fettered by neither time nor space,
thither I transport myself in the company of
Homer, of Milton, of Virgil or of Ossian. All
the events that have happened between these
two epochs, all the countries, worlds and peoples
which have had their being within these bounds,
all are mine and belong to me as actually and
as legally as the ships that entered the Piræus
belonged to a certain Athenian.

Above all, I love the poets who carry me
back to the earliest times: the death of the
ambitious Agamennon, the madness of Orestes
and all the tragic history of the family of Atreus,
persecuted by heaven, are to me far more har
rowing than any events in modern history.

Behold the fatal urn which holds the ashes of
Orestes! who does not shudder at that sight?
Electra, wretched sister, be still! for it is
Orestes himself who carries the urn and the
ashes are those of his foes.

We no longer find river banks like those of
Xanthus or Scamander; no longer see
plains like those of Hesperia or Arcady. Where
are now the Isles of Lemnos or Crete? Where
is the famous labyrinth? Where is the rock
which the forsaken Ariadne watered with her
tears? Theseus is seen no more,
Hercules,— the men, even the heroes of to
day are but pigmies!

But when I desire to behold a scene full of
inspiration and to exercise all the powers of my
imagination I boldly cling to the flowing skirts of
England's blind, but sublime, poet, at the very
moment when he soars heavenward and dares
to approach the very throne of God. What muse
has maintained him at this height, to which no
man before him had dared even to lift his eyes?
From Heaven's dazzling courts, on which
greedy Mammon turned his envious eyes, I
pass, awestruck, to Satan's gloomy caverns. I
am present at the infernal council, I mix in the
crowd of rebellious spirits and listen to their
discourse. But here I must confess to a weak
ness with which I have often reproached myself.

I can't help taking a certain interest in that
poor Satan (I mean Milton's Satan) when he is
hurled headlong from Heaven. While I condemn absolutely the obstinacy of that rebellious
spirit, I confess that the firmness he shows in
his exceeding misery, and the grandeur of his
courage, inspire me with admiration in spite
of myself.

Although not ignorant of the ills arising
from that baneful enterprise which led him to
force the gates of hell and to trouble the home
of our first parents, I cannot, do what I will,
for a moment wish to see him perish on the
road, in the confusion of chaos. I even believe
that I would gladly help him, but for the shame
which prevents me. I follow all his movements
and I find as much pleasure in travelling with
him as if I were in good company. It is useless
for me to reflect that he is, after all, only a
devil, and that he is on his way to ruin the
human race and that he is a thorough democrat,
not like those of Athens, but of Paris. All this
cannot cure me of my prejudice in his favour.
What a vast project! and what boldness in the
execution!

When the wide and three- fold Gates of Hell
suddenly fly open, and the dark pit of Chaos
and night yawns at his feet in all its horror,
he throws his fearless eye over the dark empire
of chaos and,—without hesitation,—spreading
his vast wings, which would cover a whole army,
Alings himself headlong into the abyss. What
daring can exceed this?

I think this is one of the greatest efforts of the
imagination as it is one of the most splendid voyages ever made—next to the one round my room.

<h2>XXXVIII</h2>

I should never make an end, if I were
to describe the thousandth part of the
strange events which happen to me when
I travel near my Library: Cook's Voyages
and the observations of his fellow travellers,
doctors Banks and Solander, are mere nothings
compared with my adventures in this district
alone.

So that, I believe, I could pass my life there in
a kind of delightful trance were it not for the bust
above mentioned, towards which my eyes and
thoughts always turn wherever my soul may be;
and when it is too violently agitated or dis
couraged I have only to glance at this bust to
restore it to its usual calm. This is the diapason
with which I keep in tune the discordant variety
of sensations and perceptions which make up
existence.

How striking is the likeness! there, to the
life, are the features nature gave to the best of
men. Ah! would that the sculptor could have
rendered visible his excellent soul, his genius,
his character! But is this the place to voice
his praise? or are these who surround me the
persons to whom I should address it! What
do they care?

I am content to bow before thy revered
image,— Oh, best of fathers! Alas! that likeness is all that is left to me of you and of my
country! You left this world, when crime
invaded it, and we are so oppressed with
misfortunes, that even, to-day, your family
itself is obliged to regard your loss as a piece
of good fortune. To what evils would not a
longer life have exposed you? Oh, my father,
in your happy state, are you aware of the
fate of your numerous family?
know that your children are exiled from that
fatherland you served with so much zeal
and integrity for sixty years?
Do you know that they are even forbidden to visit your
grave?

But no tyranny can take away the most pre
cious part of our inheritance,—the memory of
your virtues and the force of your example! In
the midst of the torrent of crime which over
whelmed their estates and fatherland they have
stood firm and united in the path you marked
out for them, and when they can once more
bow down before thy revered urn they will
meet with thy approbation.

<h2>XXXIX</h2>
I promised a dialogue,—I will keep my
word— It was early morning, the rays of
the sun gilded at the same instant the
top of Mount Viso and the highest mountains
of the islands at our antipodes. My animal
was already awake. This early waking might
have been caused by those nocturnal visions,
which often throw her into an agitation as weary.
ing as it is futile; or perhaps the carnival then
drawing to a close, was the secret reason of her
waking,— that agreeable but idle time having an
influence on the human machine, just like the
phases of the moon and the conjunction of
certain planets.

The animal was in fact wide awake when my
soul also shook off the trammels of sleep.
For some time she had responded in a confused sort of way to the sensations of "<em>the
other one</em>," but she was still encumbered by the
trammels of night and sleep, which now
appeared to her to be transformed into thin
gauze and Indian stuffs. My poor soul was
thus swathed up, and the god of sleep, in order
to keep her longer in his kingdom, added to his
own bonds some dishevelled tresses of fair hair,
bows of ribbon and pearl necklaces. It was
really pitiful to see her struggling in these
toils.

The agitation of my nobler part was felt by
"<em>the other one</em>," and the latter in its turn reacted
powerfully on my soul.

I had got into a state difficult to describe,
when, at last, my soul, either by design or
chance, found an escape from the bands which
were suffocating it. I don't know whether she
discovered an opening, or whether she took the
more natural way of lifting them up, but the result
was that she escaped from that labyrinth. The
tresses of dishevelled hair were still there, but
they were no longer an obstacle but rather an
assistance. My soul clutched them as a drown.
ing man lays hold of the sedges on a river's
bank, but the pearl necklace broke in the act
and the pearls rolled on the sofa and from
thence to the floor of Mdle. Haucastel, for my
soul, by a caprice difficult to explain, fancied she
was at that lady's house: a great bunch of violets
fell to the ground, on which my soul awoke, she
came back to herself, and reason and reality were
re-established. She strongly disapproved, as
you may imagine, of all that had taken place in
her absence, and at this point commenced the
dialogue which forms the subject of this chapter.

Never before had my soul had such an angry
reception — the reproaches she thought fit to
make at that critical moment gave the finishing
touch to the domestic situation—there was a
revolt— a regular insurrection.

"What," said my soul, "is it thus, while I
am absent that you, instead of reserving your
strength by quiet sleep and preparing yourself
for the better execution of my commands, have
the impertinence (the expression was a little
strong) to abandon yourself to such transports
without my permission?"

Little accustomed to this haughty tone "<em>the
other one</em>," with some warmth, replied—

"It very well becomes you Madame" (this
was to remove from the discussion all idea of
familiarity) "it very well becomes you to
assume such airs of propriety and virtue! Is
it not to the vagaries of your imagination and
your wild ideas that I am indebted for that
which you find fault in me? Why were
you not at your post? What right have
you to enjoy yourself by taking those frequent
excursions by yourself without me? Have I
ever complained of your <i xml:lang="fr">séjours</i> in the Empyrean
or in the Elysian fields, or of your conversations
with those clever people, your profound speculations (a little chaff here you perceive), your
castles in the air, your sublime theories? And
have <em>I</em> not the right, when you leave me so, to
enjoy the good things and pleasures Nature
offers to <em>me</em>?"

My soul, astonished at so much vivacity and
eloquence, did not know what answer to make.
In order to make up the quarrel she pretended to
cover with a veil of good nature the reproaches
she had ventured to make; but not to appear to
make the first overture towards reconciliation,
she thought it best to likewise adopt a ceremonious tone. "Madame," said she, with an
assumed cordiality (if the reader thought this
word misplaced when addressed to my soul,
what will he say to it now, if he only remember
the cause of the dispute?) My soul did not
perceive the extreme absurdity of this mode of
address so much was her intelligence obscured
by her passion. "Madame," said she, "I assure
you nothing would give me more pleasure than
that you should enjoy all the delights your nature
is capable of, even though I should be unable to
share them, if these pleasures were harmless and
if they did not disturb the harmony which—"Here my soul was rudely interrupted, "No, no, I
am not to be duped by your pretended good nature, the sojourn we are obliged to make together in
the room where we travel, the wound I received
which nearly killed me and which still bleeds,
is not all this the fruit of your inordinate pride
and your barbarous prejudices— My well being,
and my very existence count for nothing when
your passions are aroused—and you pretend
that you take an interest in me and that your
reproaches arise from your friendship!"

My soul saw very well that she was not
getting the best of it on this occasion; besides
she began to see that in the heat of the dispute
the cause of it was being lost sight of, and she
took advantage of this circumstance to make a
diversion. Bring some coffee," said she to
Joannetti, who at that moment entered the
room. The noise of the cups drawing off the
rebel's attention, in a moment she forgot every.
everything else—thus we show children a toy
to make them forget the unwholesome fruit
which they beg and stamp for.

Insensibly I fell asleep while the water was
being heated—I was enjoying that delightful
sensation which I have explained to my readers
and which you experience whenever you feel
yourself dozing. The pleasant noise Joannetti
made in putting on the coffee-pot, passed
through my brain and set all my sensitive
nerves in vibration, just as the striking of
a harpstring makes the octaves resound—At
last I saw a shadow, as it were, before me; I
opened my eyes, it was Joannetti!

Oh! what a delightful perfume! What an
agreeable surprise. Coffee! cream! a pyramid
of dry toast! kind reader come and breakfast
with me.

<h2>XL</h2>

What a rich multitude of pleasures Nature
has given to those who know how to
enjoy them,—and what a variety! who
can describe their innumerable variety among
different individuals and at different periods of
life? the confused recollection of the pleasures
of my childhood delights me even now. Shall I
try to paint the delight a young man feels whose
heart begins to burn with the fire of love? At that
happy age, the very names of self- interest, ambition, hatred and all the base passions which
degrade and torment mankind are unknown to
him. During this age, alas all too brief! the
sun shines with a splendour we shall never see
again, the air is purer, the streams are clearer
and cooler—and nature has aspects, and the
woods have paths we never find at a
riper age! Heavens! what perfumes the flowers
breathe around! how delicious are the fruits!
Of what a lovely colour is the morning sky!
All women are loveable and faithful; all men
are good fellows, generous and kind; every
where we meet with heartiness, frankness and
unselfishness; Nature holds naughtbut flowers,
virtues and pleasures.

Do not the excitement of love and the hope
of good fortune fill our hearts with sensations
as lively as they are various?

The sight of Nature and its contemplation as
a whole or in detail, opens to the imagination an
immense field of pleasure. Hovering over this
sea of pleasures, the imagination soon increases
theirnumberandintensity; thevarious sensations
unite and combine to form fresh ones; dreams
of glory mingle with the palpitations of love.

Kindness walks hand in hand with self
esteem; from time to time melancholy throws
over us her dark robe and changes our tears to
joy. In a word, the perceptions of the mind,
the feelings of the heart, even the remembrance
of sensations are inexhaustible sources of pleasure and happiness.

It is no wonder then, that the noise Joannetti
made with the coffee-pot, and the unexpected
appearance of a jug of cream, made on me so
lively and pleasant an impression.

<h2>XLI</h2>

I immediately resumed my travelling
coat, after having examined it with a
complacent eye; and then it was that I
resolved to write a chapter about this very
article so that the reader might know all about
it. The shape and usefulness of these coats
being very well known, I will treat more particularly of their influence upon the minds of travellers.

My winter travelling coat is made of the
warmest and softest stuff I could procure; it
covers me entirely from head to foot; and when
I am in my arm chair, with my hands in my
pockets, and my head deep in the collar,
I resemble the statue of Vishna without
feet or hands, as we see it in the pagodas of
India.

You may call the influence which I attribute
to travelling coats on travellers a prejudice if
you will, but I can certainly affirm that it
would appear to me as ridiculous to take a
single step in my journey round my room in my
uniform, my sword at my side, as it would
be to go forth and walk about the world in my
dressing-gown. Were I to find myself got
up in full fig I should not only be unable to
continue my journey, but I believe I should
not even be in a condition to read what I
have already written,—still less to under
stand it.

Does this astonish you? Do we not see,
everyday, people who believe that they are unwell
because they are unshaven, or because someone
has thought that they looked poorly and has
told them so? Clothes have such an influence
on the mind of man that there are some valetudinarians who feel in much better health when
they have on new coat and a powdered
wig. We see some, who deceive themselves
and the public by a well-finished toilette; and
one fine morning they die in full dress to the
astonishment of everybody.

Sometimes they would forget to warn Count ⸻
that it was his turn to mount guard; so a
corporal would go and rouse him betimes, on
the very day on which his turn came round, and
announce the unwelcome news; but the idea of
getting up suddenly and putting on his gaters,
and turning out without having thought over it
the night before, put him out so much that he
preferred reporting himself, sick and stopping
at home. Then he would put on his dressing
gown and send away the barber. That made
him look pale and ill, and alarmed his wife
and family. He really imagined himself a
little out of sorts that day, and told every
body so, partly to keep up appearances, and
partly also because he quite believed it himself.

Insensibly the influence of his dressing-gown
would take effect. The broth he had been forced
to take, whether he would or no, made him feel
quite sick; soon his relatio ns and friends would
send to inquire how he was, and he would be
obliged to take to his bed.

In the evening Dr. Ranson would find his pulse
hard and would order him to be bled the next day,
and, if the campaign had lasted a month longer,
it would have been the death of the invalid.

Who then can doubt the influence of travelling coats upon travellers when he reflects that
the poor Count thought more than once that he
was about to make a journey to the other world,
merely through having so inopportunely put on
his dressing-gown in this?

<h2>XLII</h2>
I was sitting near my fire after dinner,
wrapped up in my travelling coat and,
entirely given up to its influence, awaiting
the hour of departure, when the fumes of
digestion, rising to my head, so obstructed the
passages by which the thoughts pass on their
way from the senses, that all communication
was interrupted; and while my senses transmitted no idea to my brain, the latter, in its turn,
could no longer emit that electric fluid which
animates them and with which the ingenious
doctor Valli resuscitates dead frogs.

You will easily understand, after having read
this preamble, why my head fell on my chest,
and how the muscles of the thumb and forefinger of my right hand being no longer excited
by the electric fluid, relaxed themselves to that
extent that a volume of the Marquis Carraccioli,
which I was holding tightly between those two
fingers, slipped from my hold without my perceiving it and fell upon the hearth.
I had just been receiving some visitors, and
my conversation with the people just gone out
had turned upon the recent death of the
famous Dr. Cigne, who was universally
regretted, as a learned and hard-working man,
a good physician and a famous botanist. The
worth of this clever man occupied my thoughts;
and yet, said I to myself, if I were able to
call the spirits of all those whom he has sent
into the other world, who knows but that his
reputation might suffer a little?

I was proceeding, unconsiously, to a dissertation on medicine, and the progress it has made
since the days of Hippocrates. I wondered
whether the famous persons of antiquity, who
died in their beds, such as Pericles, Plato, the
celebrated Aspasia and Hippocrates himself,
died like ordinary people of some putrid or
inflammatory fever, and whether they were bled
and stuffed with remedies.


I really cannot tell why I dreamt of those
four persons instead of any others— who can
account for his dreams? All I can say is that
it was my soul that called up the doctor of Cos,
the doctor of Turin, and the famous statesman
who did such great things and committed such
grave blunders. But as to his fair friend I
humbly confess that it was "<em>the other one</em>" who
invited her. However, when I think of it, I am
tempted to feel some little pride, for it is clear
that, in this dream, the odds in favour of reason
were as four to one—pretty good this for a
young soldier like myself.

Be this as it may, whilst I was giving myself
up to these reflections, my eyes closed, and I
fell fast asleep; but, upon shutting my eyes, the
forms of the persons of whom I had been
thinking remained depicted on that delicate
canvas which we call memory, aud those
images mingling in my brain with the idea of
the calling up of the dead, before long I saw
them advancing in procession, Hippocrates,
Plato, Pericles, Aspasia and Doctor Cigne in
his wig.

I saw them seat themselves on chairs around
the fire; Pericles alone remained standing
reading the newspaper.

"If the discoveries of which you were speaking were true," said Hippocrates to the doctor, "and had been as useful to medicine as you
affirm, I should have seen a diminution in the
number of those who daily descend to the gloomy
kingdom, yet the average, according to the
registers of Minos, which I have myself verified, remains the same."

Dr. Cigne turned to me and said, "No doubt
you have heard of these discoveries: Harvey's
of the circulation of the blood and Spallanza's
of the digestion, with the mechanism of which
we are now perfectly familiar," and he made a
long recital of all the discoveries connected
with medicine, and of the host of remedies we
owe to chemistry; in short he delivered an
academical discourse in favour of modern
medicine.

"But am I to believe," said I, "that these
great men are ignorant of all you have been
telling them, and that their souls, having shuffled
off this mortal coil, meet with anything in the
whole realm of nature which is beyond their
comprehension?"

"Ah, how great is your mistake," exclaimed
the proto-physician of the Peloponesus.

"The mysteries of nature are as much hidden
from the dead as from the living! He who has
created and directs all things, alone knows the
great secret which men vainly strive to solve;
that is the only certainty we learn on the
banks of Styx." "And take my advice," added
he, speaking to the doctor, "abandon what still
remains of your earthly pride in your profession,
which you have brought with you from the
abode of mortals, and, since the labours of a
thousand generations and all the discoveries of
man, have not been able to prolong their existence for a single instant, and Charon, every day,
ferries over in his boat the same number of
shades, let us not trouble ourselves any longer
to defend an art, which, among the dead like us,
cannot be of any use even to its professors."
Thus, to my great astonishment, spake the
illustrious Hippocrates.

Dr. Cigne smiled, and as spirits can neither
resist evidence nor silence truth, he not only
took the advice of Hippocrates but, blushing
after the manner of spirits, even confessed that
he always himself had had some suspicion that
such was the case.

Pericles, who was near the window, heaved a
deep sigh, the cause of which I guessed. He was
reading an article in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Moniteur</i> on the
decadence of the Arts and Sciences.

He saw illustrious scholars abandoning their
sublime speculations, in order to invent new
crimes, and he groaned at hearing a horde of
cannibals comparing themselves with the noble
heroes of Greece, while, without shame or
remorse, they sent to the scaffold venerable old
men, women and children, and committed in cold
blood the most atrocious and useless crimes.

Plato, who had listened to our conversation
without saying anything, and seeing it suddenly
brought to an unexpected conclusion, in his
turn thus began—"I can quite believe," said
he, "that the discoveries which you great men
have made in every branch of science are
useless in medicine, which can never change
the course of nature, but at the cost of human
life. But doubtless this will not be so in the
researches which have been made in politics.
The discoveries of Locke on the nature of the
human understanding, the invention of printing,
the lessons drawn from History, such a number
of learned works which have spread knowledge
among the lower orders— so many wonders,
have no doubt contributed to the improvement
of mankind, and that happy and wise republic
which I imagined, but which the age in which I
lived made me regard as an impracticable
dream— doubtless that now exists on earth?"
At this question the honest doctor cast down
his eyes and only answered by tears, and, while
drying them with his handkerchief, he involun
tarily twitched his wig round so that a part of
his face was hidden by it—"Ye immortal
Gods!" exclaimed Aspasia, "What an extraordinary man! Is it to one of the discoveries of
your great men that you owe the idea of wearing
another man's skull as a head-dress?"

Aspasia, who had been yawning at the dissertation of the philosophers, was engrossed in a
magazine of fashions which was on the chimney-piece, and which she had been turning over
for some time, when the doctor's wig made her
utter this exclamation, and her chair being
somewhat narrow and unsteady and not very
comfortable, she, without any formality, put up
her bare legs, which were ornamented with
bandelets, on the straw-bottomed chair between
herself and me, and rested her elbow on one of
Plato's broad shoulders.

"It is not a skull," said the doctor to her,
taking off his wig and throwing it into the fire.
"It is a wig, Mademoiselle, and I do not know
why I did not throw this ridiculous ornament
into the flames of Tartarus, when I arrived
among you; but absurdities and prejudices are
so inherent in our miserable nature, that they
follow us sometimes even beyond the grave."
I took a singular pleasure in seeing the doctor
thus at the same moment abjure his physic and
his wig. "I assure you," said Aspasia to him,
"that most of the head-dresses that are represented in this magazine, which I have been
turning over, deserve the same fate as yours,
they are so very extravagant."

The fair Athenian was extremely amused in
looking over the engravings, and had much
reason to be astonished at the variety and
oddity of modern contrivances. One figure
specially struck her, it was that of a young lady
represented with the most elegant head-dress,
and which Aspasia thought only a little too
high, but the piece of gauze which covered the
throat was of such an extraordinary breadth
that you could scarcely see half her face.
Aspasia, not knowing that these prodigious
creations were only the work of starch, could
not help expressing surprise which would have
been much greater if the gauze had been transparent.

"But do tell me," said she, "why the ladies
of the present day seem to wear dresses to hide
rather than to clothe themselves; scarcely do
they permit their faces to be seen, by which
alone we could recognize their sex, so much are
their figures disguised by the odd folds of their
garments. Amongst all the figures that are represented in these pages, not one leaves her throat,
arms, or legs bare. Why have not your young
warriors endeavoured to put an end to such a
fashion?" "Apparently," added she," the
virtue of the ladies of this age, which they show
in all their garments, greatly surpasses that of
my contemporaries." As she ended these words
Aspasia looked towards me and appeared to wait
for a reply. I pretended to take no notice, and,
in order to assume an air of superior wisdom, I
pushed among the embers, with the tongs, the
remains of the doctor's wig that had escaped
burning. Then I perceived that one of the
bandelets which fastened Aspasia's buskin had
become unfastened." Allow me," said I,
"charming lady," and, thus speaking, I stooped
forward, eagerly stretching out my hands towards
the chair where I believed I had seen those
legs which formerly so much delighted great
philosophers.

I am persuaded that, at this moment, I was
very nearly being in a state of somnambulism,
for the movement of which I speak was so real,
that Rosine, who was in fact asleep on the
chair, thought this movement was intended for
her, and jumping quickly into my arms, sent
back into Hades the famous shades my travelling coat had evoked.

Charming world of imagination! which the
Benevolent Being has bestowed upon man to
console him for the realities of life! I must
leave you to-day— certain persons whom I
must obey intend to restore to me my liberty—
as if they had ever taken it away! As if it
were in their power to snatch it from me for a
single moment, and to hinder me from traversing
at my will the vast space always open before
me! they have forbidden me to walk about one
town, a mere speck, but they have left me the
entire universe, space and eternity lie open
before me.

To-day then I am free; or rather I am about
to enter into bondage again. The worry of
business is once more to weigh me down, and
I can no longer even take one step unless
measured by conventiality and duty. Happy
shall I be if some capricious goddess does not
again make me forget both, and if I escape
from this new and dangerous captivity.

Oh, why did they not let me finish my
journey? Was it for a punishment then, that
they relegated me to my chamber?—to that
delightful country which iucludes all the good
things and all the riches of the world. They
might as well have shut up a mouse in a
granary.

Never before did it strike me so forcibly
that I am a double being. While I regret
ny imaginary pleasures, something compels me to be comforted: some secret power
impels me,—tells me that I need the air of
heaven and that solitude is death. Behold I am
ready— my door opens—I wander under the
spacious porticos of the Rue de Pô — a thousand
pleasant views float before my eyes. Yes,
here is the house — the door— the staircase—I
tremble in anticipation, just as when, in slicing
a lemon we get a foretaste of its acid.

Oh, my Animal! my poor Animal, do be on
your guard!
